Um, I won't go into it in any great detail,
but, um, well can, if you like.
But, uh, in, in short, the early childhood sector, um,
has long complaints of the regulatory burden that they face.
Um, an enormous amount of anxiety
amongst the operators.
Um, a lot of frustration with the volume of compliance
and a thought that maybe the underlying objectives
of child safety and
and educational performance could be better, uh, achieved,
uh, with a simplified regime.
So the Ministry for Regulation, uh, carried out one
of its sector reviews in which it listened
to literally thousands of people in the sector, operators,
parents, teachers, and so on.
Um, and it came up with 15 recommendations,
which the government accepted.
Um, this legislation is one part of that process.
Uh, part of it is changing the licensing criteria.
There's been quite an extensive, uh,
consultation carried out by the ministry, uh, on that.
That's, that's not in scope of this bill, except for some,
uh, rules around how future licensing criteria might be set.
Uh, it also, uh, will change who the regulator is,
uh, however that will be performed
as an education reform bill, as part
of the government's wider restructuring
of the education sector.
And that's due, uh, I understand to be introduced
by Minister Stanford, uh, later this year.
Uh, she's currently working on that,
but it will also implement some of the recommendations
of this, uh, uh, early childhood sector review.
And then there is, uh, this part that we come to today, uh,
which is putting in place, uh, some statutory rules
around who is ultimately responsible for regulation of ECE
and what their procedures are, uh, for regulating.
And the purpose of that, um,
I think is probably best brought about by an experience
that an early childhood center had.
Uh, earlier this year, a very well regarded, much loved
by its rural community, uh, went to the brink of shutdown,
uh, would've probably been shut down without some gentle
ministerial intervention.
Um, and to this day, nobody is quite clear why.
Um, I think the reason why is that, uh,
there was a regulator in one office of the Ministry
of Education, and they, they tend
to vary in their reputation with the ece, uh,
who had got the PIP with this, uh, ECE and,
and really brought to bear a lot of power on it.
Now, the purpose of this legislation is
to say there's a clear purpose for, for regulating, um,
and that, uh, people who feel
that they've got an unfair deal, either as a parent, um,
or as, uh, a, um,
a regulated party can tap on the sign
and say, hang on a minute, parliament has actually said
what the purpose of regulating is.
Um, and there is a director who statutorily has the power,
uh, who's accountable for ensuring that that's upheld.
So really, this is about clarifying everybody's rights
and responsibilities and,
and purposes in relation to, uh, regulating ECE.
And along with the changes in licensing criteria,
which is outta scope today, the change of the, uh,
education Review Office being the,
the regulator separate from the policy maker,
which I think is just generally good practice.
Um, these will, will,
will put in place the statutory requirements.
Um, so that's, that's the gist of it.
Um, happy to, to go through it in more, more detail,
but, um, that's, that's what we're trying to do here.
So I thank you for considering it.
Thanks very much. Minister. First question from Lawrence
Z. Thank you. Uh, thank
you for being here, minister.
Um, I did go through the Ministry of Regulations Report,
and I find it quite problematic.
Um, in fact, for one, it didn't give me any percentage of
what was the level of support Hmm.
Within, um, the sector for regulatory changes.
I feel like it talked about a lot of things,
but didn't give me any solid numbers.
Um, there's a lot of assumptions that's being made in there.
So I think paying a bill based on
that report is problematic.
And we have heard from across the board,
both in terms of educators, parents,
and also independent agencies
raising concern over the change,
and particularly around children's safety.
So I guess my first question then, to the minister is,
considering this affects children severely,
why was there no child impact statement done?
As far as we can see,
Uh, well, first of all, the, the, the legislation is,
is crystal clear that the, the, you know,
the paramount objective is the safety of children.
Um, you know, if you want to argue that putting
that in statute
and holding someone accountable
for it is somehow a step backwards
and child safety, you can, um,
but I don't, not sure how that'll go for
You. I don't think that's
what I was asking.
I think I asked a very clear question.
Support why was there, I mean, it's a democratic process,
and we do have process
and requirements as parliament, as lawmakers.
We are holding you as the executive, the minister,
as executive speaking through the chair, um, accountable.
So one of the key pieces when we're looking at any bills
that affect children is the child impact statement.
So I can't make a,
an informed judgment without knowing the full scope,
and particularly not just based on the report
that was produced by the Ministry
for Regulate of Regulations.
So well, is the Child Impact
Sector. The, the Ministry for
Regulation consulted
literally thousands of people.
Uh, it's listened to 'em, it came up with recommendations
that are accepted by the government.
You know, the, the changes that have been made to the, um,
licensing criteria have been widely consulted
by thousands of people.
Again, so you, you know, if you want
to hang your hat on a child impact statement, um, which is,
you know, not any kind of statutory
or regulatory process that is normal in government,
then you can, um,
but I would just say that the fact
that we are putting in statute that the paramount objective
of early childhood education is child safety
and protection, like it's, it's not really clear.
Would, would a child safe child impact
statement have said No, don't do that.
Uh, I think it probably would've said it's a good idea. It
Would talk about achieves that or not.
Um, Lawrence has got another sub, and then
I'm, yeah, so I mean,
fine if the minister doesn't actually want to respond
to the question, that's all good item mind.
Well, I'm sorry. I'm, can I just check one another
Question? I have responded to your
Question. You have addressed my
question.
That's a difference from responding. We
Can, we can have this two ways You
wanna argue, talk over me.
You can, if you wanna be snippy,
you can. If you want me to answer, it
Goes both way as well. Minister
Through the chair, Lawrence, let's,
we have a, we have a nice,
I've got list to worry about.
Give the questions, we'll take the answers last up. Sure.
Does the minister agree with the submission by Manam Mouna
to say that they have serious concerns,
and also as the independent body, which is one
of our national prevention mechanisms on the opca,
would the minister consider listening to
the Child Commissioner to say that this work needs
to be paused because there are serious concerns
with the risk that it presents to the child,
but also in terms of obligations under roc?
Yes, I agree with, um, mano mouna
that they have serious concerns.
Sorry, I have a supplementary,
A supplementary to that, that
where does a child safety sit in terms of your priorities,
uh, for these two forms?
Uh, well, I think it, it's,
it should be clear from the legislation.
No, we say it's our amount objective, uh, of regulating.
And I think we've been really clear,
and everyone's been really clear all the way through this,
that child safety is the number one objective.
Now, you know, if you're concerned about child safety, uh,
that's something that you would celebrate.
Um, but you know, some people here for politics,
Man, is concern.
Okay. So have you got a question? Yeah, I do. Okay.
So just indicate to me,
and then I'll give you a question. Thank
You.
So, given your answer that you agree that
Una has serious concerns, our question is,
and what are you going to do about the serious concerns
that have been raised by the Children's Commissioner about
this legislation?
It is one thing to have a, a statement,
a clause in your legislation,
which says it will be paramount.
It is another thing to show us, demonstrate to everybody how
that's going to be achieved with
what you're proposing to do.
The Children's Commissioner has raised serious concerns.
Are you going to respond to those serious concerns
that have been raised?
Well, first of all, if you can tell us what any
of those concerns are, we'll be happy to address.
Have you read it? Can We him finish?
I'm asking you, not you ask me. I'm asking you.
Can we let him finish? Otherwise, I'm gonna cut
The question. Welcome.
To answer the question, we're quite,
we're quite com we're quite comfortable
with the concerns that being addressed.
And, you know, I think to, to, to listen to
what you're saying, you're saying, oh, well, you know, the,
the law in itself is not enough.
Um, one clause. The question is how will it be implemented
and how will it, uh, take place?
Well, I, I, I think, you know, as I,
as I laid out at the beginning, this is part
of a wider change in the way that regulation is done.
We will have everything that we have now,
however, we will also have, as far as this bill goes,
a clear statutory purpose for doing the regulation.
Uh, and that hasn't been in place before.
People haven't had a law saying, this is the objective
of regulating early childhood so
that all parties can be clear.
'cause Parliament has spoken
and said, you, you're doing this,
the paramount reason, paramount objective.
You're doing this for child safety.
Now, of course, you can talk about how it'll be implemented,
but we're here actually to talk about the legislation.
That's the purpose of this hearing that no
Primary. Yeah. Thank
You. Melissa, you did touch
in your opening remarks about this,
uh, kindy.
Uh, can you please elaborate on that, uh, example, uh, uh,
KDI that ha has been at, uh, the risk of closing down, uh,
due to regulations despite not opposing any risks
to child safety?
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Well, a a and I mean, I, I'd like to be able
to answer in more detail,
but unfortunately, as I, as I said, it remains a mystery.
Uh, what the grounds
for threatening this early childhood education center
actually were, uh, you know, that's why we need to,
under this law, have a statutory purpose, uh,
have a statutory regulator so
that people can tap on the sign
and say, this is the purpose of regulating.
These are the laws. This is why we are doing this.
Um, if you have that, uh,
then you get more clarity and less anxiety.
And I would've thought there'd be more concern on at least
one side of the table for the, the considerable anxiety
and frustration that thousands of people who, uh,
work in this sector have.
Um, and I was really astonished, uh, when I went to, uh,
a meeting with around 500 people
who work in early childhood centers, uh,
before the election, um, with the, the just sheer anger
and disdain that they had for the government of that time,
they felt that the phone was off the hook.
Um, and I'm starting to get the feeling it still is
Good on regulation.
Talk about our meeting yesterday.
Can you give us a couple of examples of regulations
that this bill is trying to address?
Um, well, this, this bill won't, uh, change the, the, the,
the changes to the licensing criteria,
which are separate scope we'll, uh, change the, the rules
for, for being licensed
and the being substantially simplified, uh,
around two thirds of them, uh, either being deleted, merged,
or, um, you know, clarified and simplified.
Um, but really this is about the way
that the regulation is done.
Uh, so it is about who's responsible,
what are their objectives and how do they go about it?
One critical part of this change is, at the moment,
there's 98 licensing criteria,
and if you don't satisfy them, your risk being shut down.
Um, a much more collaborative approach is to say, okay,
if you have any kind of breach, then depending on
how serious it is, we will, we, we, we'll,
we'll potentially give you a warning,
or we could shut you down if it's serious
thing with child safety.
But having some proportional regulating, uh,
I think is really, really important.
And one of the critical parts of this is saying
that the regulation must be done, um, in,
in proportion to the need, uh, not just going from zero
to a hundred in a few seconds.
'cause that, that creates real anxiety
and fear in the sector.
And, and one of the impacts of that, funnily enough, is
that, you know, they'll become hesitant
to call the regulator
'cause they're scared of what
will happen if they come round.
And really, we want the regulator to be collaborative,
still firm on the stuff that really matters,
but also more prepared to act as a guide if there's room
for improvement without getting all adversarial.
Yeah. Um, just, um, thank you minister.
Just I, I'll get some figures about closures, um,
from stats from, uh, early Childhood New Zealand.
Show that there were 215 closures for the year to the end
of May, 2023, a year to 10 0 2 15 closure.
The year 10 year average is only 85.
Does does that indicate to you
that there has been a real problem here that,
that we've had to address?
Yeah, there is, and in fairness, I mean, it's outta scope
for this bill, but we've made quite a few changes
around the person responsible,
around the pay parity requirements, around the need to, um,
get, you know, network analysis before opening.
I mean, the, the real network analysis is do the parents
trust you with their children?
Yeah. Um, that's hopefully helping.
But I, I think what's happened around particularly, um,
home-based centers, which fill a really important gap, one
of the things that home-based centers do is a lot
of working parents have different hours.
That's right. And so home base can often be
more flexible around the hours.
Those in, in terms
of registered ones have been falling off a cliff in terms
of their numbers recently.
Now, uh, you say, what does that, what does that mean?
Well, either they're going out of business
and they're no longer available,
or, uh, they're decided
to start operating in the gray economy
and they're no longer operating,
but they're no longer registered.
Uh, and this is the whole point.
It's, it's far better to have a regulatory system
that brings people inside the tent, allows 'em to operate,
focuses proportionately on the stuff that really matters,
um, rather than, uh, something
that is actually scaring people outta the industry
and leaving parents with less choice.
'cause that's, you know, a, a bad thing. Mm-hmm.
Um, and it's also worth just thinking about the choices
that parents and children have, um,
if you end up scaring them out of the business.
Uh, and often the child is actually in a better
and safer environment in an ECE where they're learning more
than they might be in their own home.
Now that, that's very sad, but it's a reality. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and so, you know, if you regulate an ECE out
of existence, um, then you know,
you're really thinking about the child, uh, that may end up
with a worst consequence for the trial.
Thank you, Lawrence. Yeah.
Uh, primary with a few subs.
Um, the minister has mentioned a few
interesting things, and I think
what I'm picking up on in particular from minister's
conversations, that a lot of the focus has been placed on
the owners and operators of ECE as opposed to
what the minister stated right in the beginning,
which is the safety and wellbeing of children.
And that's just an interesting observation.
I guess my question then is
we have seen similar changes
to ECE across the ditch in Australia,
which has placed children in serious harm.
I believe what the minister said
before, in terms of that children's safety is important,
and parents overwhelmingly says
that safety is the most important factor when they're
sending a child to EC.
How would then a weakening of the regulations,
albeit consistent, like the minister said, but a weakening
nonetheless, would help and contribute towards child safety?
Uh, well, two things. First of all, um, in relation
to your observation, um, yes, there is a lot
of focus on the people that operate the centers
because they are the ones that have the relationship
with the regulator.
So it's quite difficult
to talk about a regulatory relationship without talking
about the regulated party, which is the center operator.
So that, that's kind of an inevitable, if you think about
what we're doing here, that's kind of an inevitable, uh,
aspect of a relationship.
There's two parties. Um, second point, uh, you know,
your contention is that we are weakening, uh, well, we,
we simply aren't doing this.
Uh, what we are doing is creating a regulatory system which
has child safety's paramount, uh, educational attainment,
ability to transition to school.
These are the paramount goals.
We're putting them up in black
and white with a parliamentary law.
Uh, and then we're ensuring that the licensing criteria
and the apparatus for enforcing those is targeted on the
stuff that matters while making it attractive
to operate in the sector.
So long as you are a confident and safe operator.
I mean, this is, none of this stuff is, you know,
like there, there's, I mean,
I've been in opposition a long time, guys.
There's, there's, there's
sometimes, sometimes you need, sometimes you need to,
and then get know the minister finish.
Sometimes you need to work out what to, what to fight
and what might actually be good to be on board with.
Um, Yeah.
Along with the Minister
of Regulations consultation report.
Would the minister, because he wasn't in the report itself,
would the minister be willing
to release the raw data in terms of the percentages
of the respondents and how they felt about it?
Well, bear in mind that, um, I'm here
as the Associate Minister of Education now.
I am also the Minister for Regulation,
but, so if you want me to speak as the Minister
for Regulation, very happy to,
I guess I want Associate Minister of Education
to have a word with the Minister of Regulations
and the end, you know, recommend to the Minister
of Regulations that he releases the raw data of
that particular consultation.
Well, you know, I don't, I don't talk to myself,
but, um, it would be question, you know, you, you can, um,
if talking to yourself is, is the way you do it,
then you can, uh, look, I, I mean, if,
if you want the raw data, I'm,
I'm sure they'd probably be happy to release it,
but just bear in mind that, you know, a consultation is a,
is a non-scientific survey.
It's a self-selecting survey.
So if you're sitting here saying, I want the results
of a self-selecting survey that I can stand up
and say, this is a, a representation of what people want,
um, then I, I don't, I don't know that that's really,
you know, what the Green Party claims to be evidence based.
I'm not sure that's really evidence based last,
But that's a, that's actually very interesting
for the minister's sake.
Um, because the recommendations from
that particular consultation,
which the minister has just criticized himself,
is the very basis of this bill
of why we're having this bill in the first place.
So if that's not evidence-based
or sound-based, then why
introduce this bill in the first place?
Well, for the very simple reason that when you,
for example, have a select committee, uh, often
many thousands of people will submit, right?
Uh, but that doesn't mean
that the information gleaned from the consultation, uh, is
of equal use.
Sometimes a small number
of submitters can have really keen insights,
which are incredibly useful, uh, for a committee such
as this or for the ministry for regulation.
Uh, and this is my point.
I, I think, you know, you're a, an egyptologist I think,
and studied all sorts of things academically.
I'm sure you know the difference
between a quantitative survey
and a qualitative consultation,
and you're, you're trying to have a qualitative consultation
presented as quantitative.
That's what I'm criticizing. Okay.
That doesn't mean that the, that doesn't mean
that there is no value in the consultation process
that that took place.
Now, of course, we could, uh, just get, you know, Kantar,
the polling company to do a survey of
what people think and make laws that way.
I mean, that would be an interesting system of government,
but we use qualitative methods to hear
what people's views are.
Then we analyze those views
and bring together a coherent program of action
that's representative democracy in action. We do, sorry,
Not Lawrence one, Lawrence, I very,
I'm gonna palm G very quickly.
No, no, I'm gonna Palm G, Palm G Thank
You. So further
To that, I do not appreciate that jab by the way.
I'll come back to you, I'll come back to,
So if you could explain to us what is the values
based rationale behind this bill?
Well, I think that the issue is, uh,
transparency and accountability.
Uh, uh, we actually are putting up in lights,
and I mean, I just also, for, for people watching this,
I mean, it's, it's a very simple bill.
I mean, it's, you know, five
or six pages of, of legislation.
Anyone can, can read it very quickly.
Um, the purpose is that,
but the people who operate the centers, the parents
who send their kids there, the regulator themselves,
everyone should have, you know, up in lights
and very clear, this is why the New Zealand
government regulates ECE.
This is how the New Zealand government regulates ECE, uh, so
that there's no disagreement.
And everyone said that that's the key value is, and of the,
and the point of this whole bill is, is transparency now,
um, in terms of,
and accountability of the,
of the statutory regulator in terms of, you know,
what are the values underpinning it?
I, I mean, that can be seen really clearly.
Um, so, you know, if you wanna look at the objectives of,
of part two, the objectives are protect the health, safety,
and wellbeing of children, improve educational
and developmental outcomes for children,
support accessibility and choice for parents and caregivers.
Provide information to parents and caregivers
and others knowledge so that they can understand.
And this is one of the things that came out in the review is
often parents don't have good information about
who the perfor, who the what, how, how the EC is performing.
I mean, they drop their kid off,
they're gone for eight hours at a time.
Um, so that's important.
And implementing a licensing
and certification system that provides service,
provides parents with certainty
and clarity as far as reasonably practical, uh,
regarding minimum standards for quality service.
So, you know, it's, it's, it's all there quite clearly.
Um, and I, I would just say it's, you know,
this is something that, that should be welcomed.
Uh, you know,
Uh, Lawrence, you've gotta up Yeah.
Um, diminish mentioned before in terms of qualitative
and quantitative, and I think we do need to take a mixed,
uh, method approach of taking
consideration both qualitative, quantitative,
but the minister specifically focus, focus on quantitative.
Mm-hmm. So my question to the minister is,
would the minister be unhappy with the select committee
opposing this bill or recommending this bill?
Do not pass select committee
or second reading, should the public submissions
overwhelmingly says that they oppose,
dispel both quantitatively the, and qualitatively
Preempting the decision.
That was a hypothetical. Okay. Can we let hypothetical,
Well, first of all, it would be wrong for me to try
to influence the committee as a member of the executive,
but, um, second of all, you know, I,
I think the public probably won a, a government
that's fixing what matters rather than these
rather silly arguments.
Mm-hmm. Um, but, but just to go back a step,
what I pointed out is that a self-selecting sample
that's right is not a useful quantitative method.
So you, you asked for the raw data from the Ministry
for regulations, uh, con consultation,
even though I'm not actually here as the Minister
for regulation and therefore not responsible for
that in this capacity.
But I'm, I'm happy to say that, uh, blur that line.
Um, my point was that you could use that data,
but you would be misusing it
because it was not a scientific survey,
it was a self-selecting survey, uh, as will be, uh,
the people who choose to submit to the select committee.
Now, if you wanted to do a scientific methodology
and poll the public on their opinion, you,
you could start making laws based on opinion polling.
Um, but I think most people want a representative democracy
where they elect representatives who bring together a bunch
of different information, deliberate,
and then chart a path forward so
that we can have a better country.
I mean, none of this is complicated guys.
No. But it's the fact that when we have government
that doesn't listen to the public, that is a difference.
Like the previous one. You may, right.
Before we go down that road,
if there aren't any more substantive questions,
I'm gonna bring the hearing
to an end. Yeah. Thank you. Alright.
Okay. Well, thank you very
much and I wish you all the best. Appreciate
Your time.
Thank you for being here. Um,
can we go then to David Haynes on Zoom,
uh, as a submitter on earlier?
I do. And then we'll have, um, Margaret Stewart
and then our public.
So, um, David, thanks for,
uh, changing the time.
Yeah. Apologies for our delay earlier.
Um, we've got five minutes with you this morning,
including any time you give us for questions over to you.
Thank you. Koto Koto 10. Good morning.
My name is David Haynes.
Thank you for hearing my oral submission.
I believe that my submission is clear,
so in the limited time available,
I shall discuss a few salient points.
Firstly, when the associate minister introduced this bill
to the house, he stated that the new director
of regulation will be responsible for licensing, monitoring,
and enforcing compliance.
He also stated that the government is shifting licensing
certification and enforcement
to the Education Review office,
yet the bill makes it very clear that the director
of regulation will be employed by the Ministry of Education
and is accountable to the Secretary for Education.
In my submission, I have assumed
that the associate minister's speech
to the house was in error
and that the director of regulation is as stated in the bill
part of the ministry.
If the Associate minister's words were correct, then much
of the bill will have to be rewritten.
Also, when the associate minister introduced this bill
to the house, he stated that $3.1 billion
of taxpayers money goes into ECE
and that parents stump up a comparable amount.
Unfortunately, the associate minister has been unable
to produce any evidence to support his statement
that parents pay a comparable amount.
The best that his officials have been able to provide is
that his briefing papers stated that parents provide
a smaller but still significant amount of co-funding,
smaller, but still significant is not the same as comparable
like the associate minister.
I do not know what the total parent contribution is.
$100 million
or $300 million could be considered significant amounts,
but at three to 10% of the government's contribution,
these would clearly not be comparable.
My reason for raising this is not that this bill is affected
by the actual amount that parents pay,
but to highlight some of the erroneous statements being used
to justify to the House of Representatives
that this bill is actually necessary.
That said, there are some good things in this bill.
The new objectives are commendable
and is gratifying to see
that the first two objectives focus on good
outcomes for Tamaki.
I do, however, take issue with the rewording of the purpose
of part two of the act, supporting the choice of parents
and caregivers to participate in the labor market
has no place in this act.
It is a laudable objective, but the Education
and Training Act is no place for it.
If it were, then the same purpose would be included in parts
one and three of the act.
You will be aware that parental participation in the labor
market currently appears nowhere in the act.
Included in part two would be anomalous
and would be a hallmark of sloppy legislation.
Similarly, creating a director of regulation just
for ECE would be anomalous.
It is gratifying to see ECE become the subject of efforts
to improve its regulation.
It has for a long time been subject
to successful lobbying from the for-profit sector,
seeking the easing of compliance
to increase profits rather than to benefit children.
But creating a director just for ECE
and for nowhere else seems odd.
In my submission. I have mentioned additional functions
for which the director should be made statutorily
independent, and I have suggested some tightening
of the director's ability to delegate their functions,
but there is no time to dwell on those.
This morning I
provided a copy of the script to the office of the clerk so
that you can consider it in detail later,
should you So wish Kira,
Kira. Um,
any questions from the committee?
No, but that was very helpful.
Yeah, especially after the previous presentation. Okay.
If there aren't any questions, thank you very much David.
Appreciate the time you've taken
to present to the committee this morning. Thank
You. Thank you.
If we can now go to Margaret Stewart.
That was perfectly on five minutes anyway.
Margaret, if you're able to turn on your video
and your mark please.
There we go. Morning Margaret, we've got five minutes
with you this morning, including any time for questions.
I appreciate that. I appreciate the chance
to make an oral submission and,
and in injunction to, um, what I've already put in.
Um, I recommend that the will not proceed
to a second reading because I don't think it's going to do
what it intends to do.
I think that some of the regulatory regulation might
actually actually produce negative external externalities.
Um, inconsistent quality can happen over time.
It may happen very quickly,
but that's, that's one of the big things
that has been a concern in the Australian context.
Mm-hmm. Risks to particularly vulnerable children, um,
are going to may enhance, maybe enhance especially if, um,
as some of the, um, things that seem
to be trenched alongside the school.
Um, such as the, um, corporates being able
to decide how many qualified staff are,
are there may actually impact very
badly on vulnerable children.
And the other ones that the government wishes to get up
to speed when they, um,
repeated comments about getting children ready for school.
The early childhood community does not consider
that early childhood is getting ready for school,
that we work with children in the here and now,
and that they are seen as competent and competent children.
And we are not looking at them in any, any sort
of future aspect.
Um, flexibility can sometimes be be used as a figure leaf
for lowering standards.
And, um, the saying
that regulation was burdensome without sufficient evidence
is what I think, um, has been discussed
this morning with the minister.
Mm-hmm. The institution,
the providers operating under relaxed
standards may behave in ways
that economize at the expensive quality,
hiring less qualified staff, reducing supervision,
and when competition is not strong.
Um, the, the thing, the things
that have been happening in rural communities may continue.
They need to have resources to monitor risk
and they need to have resources to investigate complaints.
Um, and, um, there has to be specific enough detail
to constrain any political opportunism.
And I feel that this bill is very much a political
opportunity for, um, the corporates over the wider sector,
including teachers and parents
and children, which is why I recommend it doesn't, um,
continue to the second reading.
I'm going to show you a, um, a screen print that I've got.
This is a screen print of, um, an appeal by a woman
who was before the court.
Um, as an, as an owner
of an early childhood center in Hamilton in 1993.
The sector, um, the ministry in ERO had very specific
concerns about it, but they would only accept any complaints
in writing and as no parent or child was
or staff member was prepared
to put their complaints in writing,
things went unaddressed for quite some time.
Finally, one of the staff members came to ECD where I was,
uh, working and I had actually written a letter to the, um,
then supervisor suggesting that some of their, um,
child behavior problems were quite inappropriate.
One of the one I addressed was giving children
peppers as punishment.
Um, when the case came to court, the, um, owner
of the center and a very young supervisor who'd only just
met the requirements for both training
and the age of a super as for us being able to supervise,
um, the papers
and use of discipline was one of the things that, um,
the supervisor was convicted on.
She was also convicted on,
was trying a collapse or beat her child.
And, um, this, the owner of the center, um, had a,
had, um, smacked a child with an open hand.
The, um, very young supervisor wasn't able to,
um, employ a lawyer.
The, um, owner
of the center employed good lawyers, she got off.
And the very young, um, supervisor Lisa Bates was um,
sent as a two year jail.
It seems to me that these are the things
that happen in UN an unregulated environment.
These have happened in New Zealand.
I have direct knowledge of them
and they're also being seen
to happen across the Addiction Australia, which is one
of the reasons why I think that this bill is very poor.
Um, I can't imagine why somebody would write into the act
that the regulator will ne will not necessarily be a,
a present employer of the ministry.
It seems to be a very strange, um, comment on there
and I think that, as I said, I recommend
that there will be discontinued.
Thanks. Thank you very much Margaret.
Uh, that's all we have time for this morning.
Appreciate, thank you. Taking the time to the committee.
Thank you. Okay. Committee, we're now gonna move back.